Piaget’s Legacy:
Cognition as Adaptive Activity
Ernst von Glasersfeld
ScientiÞc Reasoning Research Institute
University of Massachusetts, USA.

Abstract á In the visual arts, ÒrepresentationÓ usually means a copy or reproduction of some original. In
that context it is clear that the original is always
something the representer has seen, something that
is the product of ordinary visual perception. With the
introduction of the term in philosophical writings,
the spurious question has arisen whether or not representations could reproduce, replicate, or correspond to things-in-themselves. The question was
long ago given a negative answer on logical grounds
by neurophysiology. Most arguments on the topic
could have been avoided if one had followed Mark
Baldwin, the pioneer of cognitive psychology, and
had used the term ÒpresentationÓ which has the added advantage of being a viable translation of the German ÒVorstellungÓ.

If you look up the word ÒrepresentationÓ in a large
dictionary, you will Þnd that it has at least Þve or
six meanings, some of which are not compatible
with each other. In ordinary English, ÒrepresentationÓ usually means a deliberate graphic arrangement of sensory material, such that it is likely to be
interpreted in terms of a generally available concept.
Here are some examples: A famous painting by
van Gogh is a reliable representation of sunßowers.
Or: Henri Matisse had a special talent for making
squiggles that most viewers recognize as wonderfully stylized representations of speciÞc fruits or
ßowers.
In the United States, a vertical wave line, or in
Europe a capital Z, have been adopted as a conventional trafÞc signs because they can be interpreted as
representing a curving road. Such representations
do not have to be visual. Certain sounds can be used
to represent a given event. For example, in the
course of a stage play, a ßash of light followed by a
rumbling noise will be interpreted as a thunderstorm.

The Problem of
Psychological Representation
But all these are not the kind of representation that
concerns us here. The British philosopher John
Locke used the term to indicate that words stand for
(or ÒrepresentÓ) ideas (Locke, 1690, Bk. iii, Chpt. ii,
¤2); occasionally he used it also for the mental
image of an idea, either Þctitious (e.g. Òthe unspeakable joys of heavenÓ, Bk. ii, Chpt. xxi, ¤37) or
Òmade up of ever so many particularsÓ (Bk. ii, Chpt.
xxvi, ¤1). It was presumably this second meaning
that led translators of KantÕs Critique of Pure Reason to use ÒrepresentationÓ for the German word
ÒVorstellungÓ. This was unfortunate because the
ordinary- language meaning had practically superseded the LockeÕs more abstract second meaning.
The German word Vorstellung indicates a range of
things that take place spontaneously in someoneÕs
head and do not require an original. In contrast, the
English ÒrepresentationÓ normally refers to sensory
material that more or less reliably evokes a common
experience. That is to say, it is used to call forth in
the beholder speciÞc remembered situations, events,
or objects (as for instance, the ßowers and fruits in
MatisseÕs drawings). The term, therefore, indicates
a perceptual cause whose effect is expected to be an
image in the mind of the perceiver. In short, ÒrepresentationÓ in English inevitably suggests reference
to an originalÑin much the same way as does
ÒcopyÓ, ÒreplicaÓ, and ÒreproductionÓ.1
In contemporary psychologyÑand in the study of
intelligence, be it natural or artiÞcialÑthe term representation is used for mental images that are supposed to reßect, or correspond to things that lie
beyond our experiential interface.
1

Note that reprŽsentation in French and rappresentazione in Italian function in the same way.

Understanding Representation in the Cognitive Sciences
Edited by A. Riegler, M. Peschl, and A.von Stein. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, 1999

283

284

Ernst von Glasersfeld

Jerry Fodor, for instance, explained in his interview with Baumgartner and Payr (1995, p.88):
Òmental states that represent states of the worldÓ
constitute a representational capacity.
In another interview in the same collection, James
McClelland says: ÒI agree with Newell: the mind is
a physical device that performs operations on physical objects, which are not the things themselves but
representations of those thingsÓ (Baumgartner &
Payr, 1995, p.134).
Other English speakers in the Þeld of cognitive
science have also explicitly or implicitly subscribed
to the view that representations represent real
things. It does not matter whether they deÞne Òto
representÓ as to depict or to stand for, because in
both cases there is no way of checking any such
relation to ÒrealÓ things.
It is rather ironical that German-speaking authors,
anxious to tie in with Anglo-Saxon cognitive science, are now aiding and abetting the confusion by
translating the English word in their own writings as
ÒReprŠsentationÓ rather than as Vorstellung, from
which it derived by mistranslation.
I want to emphasize that computer scientists use
the term ÒrepresentationÓ quite legitimately when
they refer to the way they have coded something in
a computer. In their case, the coded instructions, the
program, or whatever they have fed into the
machine, is expected to generate results that can in
some sense be considered replicas of something in
the scientistsÕ own heads.
The same goes for neurophysiologists who speak
of observable phenomena in the brain as ÒrepresentingÓ certain activities and results of the mind. Occasionally, however, they too, slip into the misleading
use of the term exempliÞed by the quotations from
Fodor and McClelland. That is to say, they falsely
suggest that states of the brain reßect states of an
external ÒrealÓ world.

The Impossible Correspondence
This use of representation is misguided, because it
entails the belief that certain ideas we abstract from
our experience correspond to a reality that lies
beyond experience. It would be interesting to study
the reasons why this belief manages to survive in the
face of a long history of incontrovertible refutation.
It has survived in spite of the fact that it was shown
to be illusory by Xenophanes at the time of the PreSocratics; and it survived in spite of all the sceptics

since, who have amply demonstrated the logical
impasse that makes it illicit to claim a representational relation between mental images or structures
and any independent external reality.
The main argument of the sceptics is simple and
irrefutable. To know whether anything we derive
from experience corresponds to, or ÒrepresentsÓ an
aspect of an external world, we should have to be
able to compare it to the real thing. But this we cannot do, because we can compare experiences only to
more experiences.
Some early theologians of the Christian era added
another solid argument: Reason, they said, operates
with concepts that we have derived from experience; in our experiential Þeld we never meet anything that is omniscient, omnipotent, and everpresent; consequently, we cannot rationally conceive of God, because the knowledge, the power,
and the eternity we should ascribe to Him go beyond
what is conceivable to us (cf. Meyendorff, 1974).
Unlike the church that persecuted them, they did
not see this as a calamity, because they understood
that faith does not require a rational grounding.
The argument that our concepts, which we
abstract from experience, cannot grasp anything that
lies beyond our experiential interface, applies not
only to the divine but also to any ontological reality
posited as independent of the human experiencer.
In our present age, where science is supposed to
be the arbiter of all fundamental questions of knowledge, it is even more surprising that a correspondence theory is still propagated by philosophers.
The notion of ontological correspondence is quite
incompatible with contemporary scientiÞc models. I
am not referring to some of the relevant arguments
that have been drawn from relativity theory and
quantum mechanics; I am referring to an established
Þnding in neurophysiology that would seem to be
more pertinent to A.I.
About a hundred and Þfty years ago, Johannes
MŸller observed that all the neural impulses or signals that the so-called sense organs send to the cortex of the brain are qualitatively the same. As Heinz
von Foerster, who three decades stressed the epistemological importance of this fact, puts it: these neural signals vary in frequency and intensity and tell
us Òhow muchÓ, but they never tell us ÒwhatÓ (Foerster, 1973). In other words, they are quantitative.
They contain no information whatever about the
character of the event that is supposed to have
caused them.

PiagetÕs Legacy: Cognition as Adaptive Activity

According to the neurophysiologistÕs model of
the nervous system, it therefore appears that the
discrimination of sensory modalitiesÑseeing,
hearing, touching, etc.Ñmust be the result of the
systemÕs own computation. From this perspective,
then, whatever sensory structures, patterns, or
images a living system compiles are its own construction, and the notion that they represent something that was there beforehand, has no empirical
foundation.2

Presentations and Re-Presentations
I therefore suggest that it would be wiser to scrap the
term ÒrepresentationÓ in these contexts and to follow Mark BaldwinÕs example and speak of ÒpresentationsÓ. This would be much closer to the Kantian
term ÒVorstellungÓ.
These ÒpresentationsÓ are pieces of experience
that we have combined in order to form more and
less complex structures, in our attempt to order and
systematize the world in which we Þnd ourselves
living. It is the only world we knowÑand itÕs a
world that only we ourselves perceive and conceive.
Insofar as we remember these structures, we can
recall themÑand then they are Re-Presentations. I
write this with a hyphen, to indicate that they are
pieces of experience we have had and are now
reviewing. They are not pieces of an external reality.
Almost Þfty years ago, my friend and teacher Silvio Ceccato made a remark which, I think, is germane to todayÕs topic because it throws light on the
distinction between perception and re-presentation.
The most obvious instances of re-presentations
happen in our dreams, when there is no perceptual
activity at all. These re-presentations, Ceccato said,
start from a concept and manifest only such sensory
characteristics as are needed in the particular story
of the dream.
You may, for example, dream that you are in a
room, but all you see of the room is a door (perhaps
because you expect someone to come in through it).
You have no idea of the size of the room, and there
are no windows, curtains, pictures, no ceiling or furniture, or anything else that usually characterizes a
2 Because

statements like this are often misinterpreted
as Òa denial of realityÓ, I want to point out that I am not
saying sensory signals have no cause; I am merely asserting that we cannot know such causes.

285
room. These items may come in laterÑas the plot of
the dream developsÑ but at this point, they are irrelevant in your dream-presentation of a room.
In contrast, your perception of a room starts from
sensory impressions that you proceed to coordinate,
and they then allow you to consider them compatible with your concept of ÒroomÓ.
One can therefore say: in perception, sensory signals call up a concept, in re-presentation, on the
other hand, a concept calls up sensory impressions.
In neither case is the experience caused by what philosophers want to call ÒrealityÓ.

The Space of Experiential Reality
If one accepts these premisesÑand I can see no way
of avoiding itÑone is faced with a formidable question: How does it come about that we are able to
generate the relatively stable experiential world of
everyday living? In other words, these premises
make it necessary to show that we can construct our
experiential world without ever discovering anything about the properties and structure of an external, ontological reality.
A radical interpretation of PiagetÕs Genetic Epistemology provides an answer to that question.
Before going further, however, I want to stress that
an inherent principle of PiagetÕs constructivist
approach implies that no solution of a practical
problem can claim to be the only one. But at present,
PiagetÕs is the only coherent theory or model I know,
and I will give you a brief sketch of some of its features.
PiagetÕs primary principle is that knowing is an
adaptive function. To appreciate this statement, one
has to be quite clear about the biological notion of
adaptation. It is notÑas one is often led to
believeÑan activity of organisms or species. It is
the result of natural selection and refers to the ability to live and reproduce in the present environment.
We can visualize it with the help of a metaphor: the
environment ÒselectsÓ in the manner of a screen
used to grade gravel: the screen admits what falls
through and discards what does not. Similarly anything that passes through the constraints set by the
present environment is adapted, or, as evolutionary
biologists sometimes say, everything that survives
is viable in the given environment. But just as having slipped through, does not tell the pebbles anything about the screen, so, to have survived does not
tell the biological organisms anything about the

286
constraints they have not met, i.e., the constraints
that eliminated those that could not survive.
The concept of adaptation was Þrst applied to
cognition, by William James, Georg Simmel, Hans
Vaihinger, and others, around the turn of the century.
It then became the main stay in PiagetÕs ÒGenetic
EpistemologyÓ. Today it is also a key concept in
Evolutionary Epistemology.Ê However, as far as I
have understood the proponents of this school, they
share the traditional illusion that adaptation brings
our knowledge closer to a postulated ontological
reality.
Konrad Lorenz, for instance, maintained that the
great success of our concepts of space and time warrants the belief that they reßect something of the
structure of an observer-independent world. He
wrote:
Adaptation to a given condition of the environment
is equivalent to the acquisition of information about
that given condition. (Lorenz, 1979, p.167)

As I have tried to show with the metaphor of the
screen, viability entails neither ÒinformationÓ about
the environment nor correspondence with it. The
fact that certain concepts and certain theories
ÒworkÓ for us, in that they do what we expect them
to do, means no more than that they are compatible
with the constraints we experience. In other words,
reality leaves sufÞcient room for them to work in
our experiential world.
This has the important corollary that our successful concepts and theories can never be claimed to be
the only ones that workÊ÷Êand therefore they cannot
be claimed to be ontologically ÒtrueÓ.
Piaget held that all knowledge springs from
action, and he proposed a highly sophisticated
developmental model of how concepts & theories
may be constructed. Although he did this at least a
decade before cybernetics was launched as a discipline by Norbert Wiener, PiagetÕs model anticipated
the principles of self-regulation and of the negative
feedback-loop.3
There is not enough time here to go into details,
but I want to present at least two examples.

Ernst von Glasersfeld

PiagetÕs Scheme Theory
The model of PiagetÕs action scheme, which constitutes the foundation of his learning theory, is a complex of three elements: A recognized situation, an
activity that has been associated with this situation,
and an expected result.
The recognition of a situation involves assimilation; that is to say, the situation must manifest certain characteristics which the organism has
abstracted in the course of prior experience. (If it
also has other characteristics, these are disregarded.) The recognition then triggers the associated activity. If the expected result does not occur,
the organismÕs equilibrium is disturbed and an
accommodation may occur, which may eventually
lead to the formation of a new action scheme.
The fact that accommodation does not take place
unless something unexpected happens, is important
for any learning theory, and it relates PiagetÕs
scheme theory to the notion of the feedback-loop in
control theory. There, too, certain activities are triggered when a perceived condition is not compatible
with a given reference value.4

Social Interaction
The experiential environment in which the human
organism normally grows up is composed of things
and people. The differentiation of these two categories is gradual, and only gradually are different
schemes developed for coping with ÒinanimateÓ
things and coping with people. Eventually the second kind provides far more opportunities for accommodation and learning than the Þrst. Piaget has reiterated this innumerable times, but his critics
nevertheless contend that he did not consider social
interaction.
In fact, the experiential reality we construct for
ourselves is to a large extent the result of our social
interactions. Insofar as we are able to construct a
viable modus vivendi, it is preponderantly due to
accommodations in the course of social adaptation.
In order to live in a society, a sufÞcient number of
our ideasÑour concepts and schemes of actionÑ

3

Judging by the twenty interviews with Òeminent cognitive scientistsÓ that Baumgartner and Payr published in
their recent book, Piaget seems to be persona non grata
in this new branch of science. The index does not contain
his name, and the only mention of it I could find is a rather summary dismissal.

4 Gary Drescher, in his 1991 book, takes into consideration the role of results expected of an activity, but gives
the usual, misleading definition of PiagetÕs concept of
accommodation as a simple inverse of assimilation
(p.23).

287

PiagetÕs Legacy: Cognition as Adaptive Activity

have to be compatible with those of others. And this
compatibility confers on them a viability that goes
beyond the merely individual. The same goes for the
acquisition and use of language. Communication
with others requires that the meanings we attribute
to words prove compatible with those of other
speakers.
Compatibility, however, does not entail the kind
of ÒmatchÓ that is implied when people speak of
Òshared ideasÓ or Òshared knowledgeÓ. Compatibility, to repeat it once more, means no more and no
less than to Þt within constraints. Consequently, it
seems to me that one of the most demanding tasks
of A.I. would be the plausible simulation of an
organismÕs experience of social constraints.
To end this brief survey of the perspective I have
been working at for a few decades, I want to repeat
that constructivism makes no claim to ontological
truth. In fact, it conÞrms that no model or theory can
claim to be ontologically true. Models and theories
can be gauged only by how well they do what they
promise to doÑwhich is to say, they have to be
tested in practice.
I am still pursuing this way of thinking, because I
believe that it may eventually make people aware of

the fact that we cannot shirk the tremendous responsibility that lies upon our shoulders; for we are individually responsible for what we think and what we
do, and thus for the experiential world we construct.

References
Baumgartner, P. & Payr, S. (1995) Speaking Minds.
Princeton, NJ.: Princeton University Press.
Drescher, G. (1991) Made-up MindsÑA Constructivist Approach to A.I. Cambridge, MA.: MIT
Press.
Foerster, H. von (1973) On constructing a reality. In:
Preiser, F. E. (ed.) Environmental Design Research . Stroudsburg: Dowden, Hutchinson &
Ross, pp. 35Ð46.
Locke, J. (1690) An essay concerning human understanding (Fraser, A.C., ed.), Vol.1 & 2. New York:
Dover Books, 1959.
Lorenz, K. (1979) Kommunikation bei Tieren. In:
Peisl, A. & Mohler, A. (eds.) Der Mensch und
seine Sprache. Wien: PropylŠen Verlag.
Meyendorff, J. (1974) Byzantine Theology. New
York: Fordham University Press.

288

Ernst von Glasersfeld

