In I.E.Sigel, D.M.Brodzinsky, and R.M. Golinkoff (Eds.), Piagetian
theory and research. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 87–95, 1981.

067

The Concepts of Adaptation and Viability in a
Radical Constructivist Theory of Knowledge1
Theodore Mischel, to whose memory this chapter on constructivism is dedicated, was
interested in epistemology as well as in psychology. In what he did and in what he
wrote he never tired of reminding psychologists that their work, if it is to be of real
consequence, must be rooted in philosophically firm ground. It is a measure of his
success that a panel on ‘‘constructivism’’ can today draw a large and illustrious
audience. To add a personal touch, I feel that it is to a large extent due to Mischel’s
work that someone like myself, whose qualifications as psychologist are rather
unconventional, may venture to express ideas on the epistemology of cognition that
are certainly alien to, and perhaps even incompatible with, some of the views that
have for a long time dominated the branch of science that refers to itself as the study
of behavior.
The ideas I shall be expounding owe a great deal to other people. First and
foremost among them, Silvio Ceccato, who, 30 years ago, fathered the constructivist
approach to cognition in Italy, and Warren McCulloch, the great poet of cybernetics.
More recently I have drawn from the works of Humberto Maturana and Heinz von
Foerster. Also, as I get into my subject, it will become clear, I am sure, that much of
the conceptual basis on which I build was Piaget’s long before.2 However, the
following ideas about adaptation and viability are my own concoction and cannot be
blamed on anyone else.
The purpose of this chapter is to propose a radical reassessment of the meaning
of the term “adaptation”. I argue that it erroneously implies an adapting activity on
the part of the organism and that the particular aspect of evolution to which we want
to refer is better expressed by the term “viability”. Having stripped away the
misleading connotation, I shall try to show that the concept of viability can serve as
the mainstay of a consistent constructivist theory of knowledge that eliminates some,
if not all, of the age old problems of epistemology.

A short version of this paper was read in the Theodore Mischel Symposium on
Constructivism at the 7th Annual Meeting of the Jean Piaget Society, Philadelphia, May 19-21,
1977.
2 I shall not cease to thank Charles Smock, who, early on, detected that affinity and then
patiently introduced me to Piaget’s work.
1

Ernst von Glasersfeld (1981) The Concepts of Adaptation and Viability…

1

Since the theory of knowledge I propose is not just constructivist, but radically
constructivist (von Glasersfeld, 1975), a brief preliminary justification of
constructivism will help to clear the ground for the further development. In discussing
Piaget and particularly his ideas on the ‘‘construction of reality,” the question is
frequently raised why anyone should want to be a constructivist and hold that the
knowing subject constructs his or her knowledge rather than obtains it simply by
looking at the real world. The question, given our common sense traditions, sounds
extremely sensible. Why, indeed, should anyone want to go to all that trouble? Reality
appears so obvious, so close, so tangible and even inescapable, that it seems quite
absurd to assume that the subject should have to construct it for himself or herself. I
have no illusion that a common sense belief so general and so venerable as that one,
could be dismantled by one simple argument; but that is all I shall offer here.3
Even the most naive of naive realists will at some point come to wonder how
all the ‘‘information’’ one believes one is gleaning from the real world actually gets
from that outside world into an individual’s system so that the individual can have a
cognitive representation of it. In other words, one begins to ask: How do I know? If
the individual belongs to our culture and is of a scientific bent, he or she will not be
satisfied with introspection but will begin to observe other organisms in order to find
out how these organisms come to know their environment, which they tacitly but
erroneously equate with the world (von Glasersfeld, 1976). Because one cannot really
get inside the organism that is being observed, one eventually formulates or builds
some kind of a model of this process of “knowing.” That is what students of perception
and the neurosciences in general have been doing and are doing. According to the
more or less accepted contemporary models, there are “receptors,” “firings,” and
“neural networks” or “fields” that compute a “representation” out of the firings. In the
present context we can say that it is irrelevant whether or not the investigator then
claims that the organism’s representation is functionally equivalent to, isomorphic
with, or, simply, a picture of “the real world” —whatever an observer says of it, there
can be no doubt about the fact that the organism has to construct a representation out
of such proximal data as it has. In the case of the neuronal model these proximal data
are small elementary events referred to as “firings of neurons.” As Hebb (1958) wrote:
“At a certain level of physiological analysis there is no reality but the firing of single
neurons [p. 461].”
It seems, then, that there is simply no way around the assumption that
organisms construct their representations of their world, their environment, or
whatever one chooses to call what is outside them. In other words, an activity of
construction has to be assumed regardless of whether one wants to be a constructivist
or not.
Scientific investigators can hardly stop at that point. No matter how diffidentor
suspicious they might be about questions that smack of philosophy, sooner or later
they will be compelled to ask just how adequate, correct, or “true” a representation of
an outside world the organisms can construct inside themselves. The moment they ask
that question, they are at the very core of traditional epistemology. That is to say, they
For a more complete exposition of the bases of constructivism see Ceccato, 1949 and
1964/66; Maturana, 1970, Piaget, 1937; von Foerster, 1972 and 1976; von Glasersfeld, 1975,
1976, 1977a, and 1977b; and Smock and von Glasersfeld, 1974.
3

Ernst von Glasersfeld (1981) The Concepts of Adaptation and Viability…

2

face the scenario that was set up by the pre-Socratics and then formally and
definitively presented by Plato. There is, on one side, an existing, fully structured
world and, on the other, a Knower whose eternal task it is to get to know that world.
This scenario has been welded so firmly to our concept of knowledge that there seems
no way of separating the two. In our Western philosophical tradition, the ‘‘getting to
know’’ has been viewed either as the activation of innate ideas which automatically
match the structure of the real world (because God and, more recently, Evolution have
predisposed that match) or it is viewed as the result of the action of our senses. The
second, i.e., the empiricist, alternative has dominated science for quite some time
now, and it has turned our senses into somewhat mysterious gadgets which, apart
from their physiological functioning, have the ability of conveying information from
outside the organism to its inside. Of course, there have been and still are many
hybrid versions that attempt to combine the two alternatives, taking varying
percentages of both. The one point in which they all are equivalent is that, owing to
their common presupposition of preexisting ‘‘objective’’ structures, they are unable to
resolve the question of how we could ever know that the representation inside the
organism is really like that preexisting world which it is supposed to depict. The
question was asked by Socrates and it has remained unanswered to this day.
In the 1930s, as a student of mathematics, like many of my generation, I
thought I had found my bible in Wittgenstein’s Tractatus. I read and reread that book
until one fine day, coming to paragraph 2.223, I hesitated and the beautiful edifice of
ideas collapsed. What I read and understood for the first time was: “In order to
discover whether the picture is true or false we must compare it with reality”
(Wittgenstein, 1933/1922, p. 43). How could one possible carry out that comparison?
With that question, although I did not know it at the time, I found myself in the
company of Sextus Empiricus, of Montaigne, Berkeley, and Vico – the company of all
the courageous sceptics who throughout the history of this civilization have
maintained that it is impossible to compare our image of reality with a reality outside.
It is impossible, because in order to check whether our representation is a ‘‘true”
picture of reality we should have to have access not only to our representation but also
to that outside reality before we get to know it. And because the only way in which we
are supposed to get at reality is precisely the way we would like to check and verify,
there is no possible escape from the dilemma.
Today, 40 years later, the problems with the traditional scenario of epistemology
are clearer to me. In order to make my ideas comprehensible, let me digress for a
moment and talk about the concept of adaptation.
In the biological theory of evolution we speak of variability and selection, of
environmental constraints and of survival. If an organism survives individually or as a
species it means that, so far at least, it has been viable in the environment in which it
happens to live. To survive, however, does not mean that the organism must in any
sense reflect the character or the qualities of his environment. Gregory Bateson (1967)
was the first who noticed that this theory of evolution, Darwin’s theory, is really a
cybernetic theory because it is based on the concept of constraint rather than on the
concept of causation. Somehow we always tend to think that the character of surviving
organisms is determined by its environment. We speak of “adaptation”, and the idea
of causation seems to become associated with that concept so that we end up believing

Ernst von Glasersfeld (1981) The Concepts of Adaptation and Viability…

3

that environmental constraints can cause certain biological structures or certain
behaviors in organisms. This is a serious conceptual error. In order to remain among
the survivors, an organism has to ‘‘get by” the constraints which the environment
poses. It has to squeeze between the bars of the constraints, to coin a metaphor. The
environment does not determine how that might he achieved. It does not cause
certain organisms to have certain characteristics or capabilities or to be a certain way.
The environment merely eliminates those organisms that knock against its
constraints. Anyone who by any means manages to get by the constraints, survives.
We all should know that, from looking around us. If one looks around in Athens,
Georgia, one can see cardinals and cockroaches, humming birds, bats, chipmunks,
and snakes; daddy longlegs, opossums, frogs, and catfish; and a seemingly infinite
variety of mushrooms, moulds, butterflies, and worms. All of them survive in that
environment and they have found entirely different solutions for survival. For all we
know, there is an infinite variety of solutions for survival, an infinite number of ways
of being viable. Tomorrow, if the environment should change, some of today’s
organisms may no longer be viable, others may make it in spite of the change. In the
ordinary way of speaking we would say that those organisms that survive the change
have or are adapted to the new environment. This again invites the conceptual error
mentioned before, since it suggests that the change in the environment has caused
specific corresponding changes in the organisms. But that is not the case. Organisms
may indeed change, but the changes they manifest are due to their inherent
variability, their mutations, genetic drift, or what you will. All the environment
contributes is constraints that knock out some of the changed organisms while others
are left to survive. Thus we can say that the only indication we may get of the ‘‘real”
structure of the environment is through the organisms and the species that have been
extinguished; the viable ones that survive merely constitute a selection of solutions
among an infinity of potential solutions that might be equally viable.
What I suggest now, is that the relationship between our knowledge and “reality”
is similar to the relationship between organisms and their environment.4 In other
words, we construct ideas, hypotheses, theories, and models, and as long they survive,
which is to say, as long as our experience can be successfully fitted into them, they are
viable. (In Piagetian terms we might say that our constructs are viable as long as our
experience can be assimilated to them.)
This, of course, immediately raises the question as to what “survival” and
“viability” mean in the cognitive domain. Briefly stated, concepts, theories, and
cognitive structures in general, are viable and survive as long hey serve the purposes
to which they are put, as long as they more or less reliably get us what we want.
“Getting us what we want,” however, means different things in different realms of
experience. In the realm of everyday experience, for instance, Newton’s physics serves
our purposes well and is perfectly viable. Most of us simply do not enter the realms of
experience where the methods and predictions based on Newton’s concepts break
The idea that science or the growth of knowledge resemble or are in some way subject
to the “laws or evolution” is certainty not new; but whenever I have seen this idea, it was
always contaminated by the conception of adaptation as a progressively better match with
environment and reality.
4

Ernst von Glasersfeld (1981) The Concepts of Adaptation and Viability…

4

down. This is not so for the ideal scientist (e.g., as portrayed by Popper, 1934/1965
and 1962/1968) who is perennially searching for concepts and theories that “get by”
the constraints encountered in all realms of experience and who is, therefore, more
concerned with the possible “falsification” of his concepts and hypotheses than with
their practical success as means in the pursuit of certain limited ends. This leads to the
somewhat peculiar situation that Newton’s ideas are quite “true” for the man in the
street, the mechanic, and the working engineer, whereas hey are “false” for a relatively
small group of specialized scientists. What must be stressed, however, is that none of
this can change the epistemological status of the ideas, concepts, theories, or models
that we consider as constituting our “knowledge.”
If we accept this concept of viability, it becomes clear that it would be absurd to
maintain that our knowledge is in any sense a replica or picture of reality. It does not
have to be, nor indeed could it ever be anything of the sort. On the pragmatic everyday
level it has to be useful to us in that it reliably helps us to achieve our purposes. On the
scientific level, however, usefulness does not seem particularly relevant. The scientist
is looking for consistency, for mutually compatible theories and models, and,
ultimately, for a unitary, homogeneous explanation of experience on all levels.
Empiricists and statisticians have long been telling us that we can never ‘‘prove” a
theory we can only disprove it. In my terms that means that while we can know when
a theory or model knocks against the constraints of our experiential world, the fact
that it does not knock against them but “gets by” and is still viable, does in no way
justify the belief that the theory or model depicts a ‘‘real’’ world.
In this context it is important to realize that ‘‘constraints of our experience’’ do
not necessarily refer to constraints that have to be thought of as inherent in an
ontological reality. It was Piaget who has finally made clear that many, if not all, the
constraints that govern our actual and potential experience stem from our own
construction. Any construction, be it physical or mental, is subject to certain
constraints that spring from the material that the constructor employs. It is easy to see
that a bricklayer is to some extent constrained in his building by certain basic
characteristics that are inherent in the bricks he uses. In much the same way, I
believe, the representation we construct of our adult experiential world is constrained
by certain basic characteristics of the building blocks we are using, which is to say, the
building blocks which we created during the sensorimotor period. We call these
building blocks “space,” “time,” “identity,” and “change,” and some of their early
combinations give us, among others, “objects,” “motion,” and “causation”. All of them
are crucial elements in our later picture of the world and determine the kinds of world
we can represent to ourselves. As Mischel (1971) formulated it, “What he (the subject)
responds to is his construal of the external intrusion, and he is also the one who
interprets the outcome of his compensatory activities [p. 324].”
Finally, there is yet another perhaps even more general way in which we can
apply the concept of viability. A rather convincing case can be made for the notion that
all practical learning may be considered the result of a process of induction. The
simplest explication of inductive inference, I believe, is this: If an organism has an
experience, and that experience is in some sense successful or satisfactory, the
organism will be inclined to repeat it. If there is more experience, the organism will
begin to extract or compute regularities from its corpus of experience. As David Hume

Ernst von Glasersfeld (1981) The Concepts of Adaptation and Viability…

5

put it, we repeat what was successful in the past, on the assumption that there is some
regularity and that the experience that we have not yet had will not be altogether
different from the experience we have had. To use this principle in our models of
living organisms, it is not at all necessary to presuppose “awareness” or
“consciousness” on the part of the organism. Though some behaviorists may be
shocked, I would suggest that this basic form of inductive inference is exactly
equivalent to Thorndike’s “Law of Effect.” In any case, both Thorndike’s principle and
that of induction result in the setting up of more or less reliable regularities. These
regularities, regardless of whether we consider them predictions, explanations,
instruments for achieving goals, or merely learned patterns of behavior, are
regularities that have been established in past experience, and as long as they are
replicated in the organism’s further experience, they “survive.” Repetition thus creates
and perpetuates the ‘‘viability” of posited regularities. We spread of “confirmation” or
“corroboration” (Popper, 1962/l968), but again we must beware not to interpret
perpetuated viability as correspondence to a “real” world or as “truth” in the
traditional sense.
If we can accept this view of inductive inference as the establishing of regularities
that survive and remain viable as long as our experience does not falsify them, and if
we conclude that, by and large, we have no better way of explaining, predicting, and
governing our experience, then we can take one further step that is relevant to the
problem involved in what Piaget (1975) has called equilibration majorante, i.e., the
incremental equilibration that proceeds in spirals, incorporating more and more items
and events in the developing organism’s experience. This constitutes a problem
because of the tacit assumption that such an effort of incrementation could be
explained only by some specific form of motivation. I would now suggest that one
reason for this tendency to increment the range of experience within which
equilibration is attempted by the organism, may be quite simply that the organism
comes to make an inductive inference about the principle of induction itself. In other
words, given that inferring regularities has been successful in the organism’s past
experience, to infer regularities will be likely to become a goal in its own right and the
organism will begin to enlarge its range of experience, and will foster or create new
experience simply for the sake of establishing regularities. Once such a tendency is
established – and if living organisms can be described as “inductive systems”
(Maturana, 1970), it could not help being established – it would lead the adult
organism to engage in some of the activities that seem to defy utilitarian or other
simple explanations. Activities such as solving puzzles for the sake of solving them, or,
to use a more romantic traditional expression, to pursue truth for the sake of truth
alone, fall under this rubric. This, clearly, is no more than a conjecture, and all that
can be said to make it more plausible is that it would seem to be a logical consequence
of the idea of viability presented here.
To sum up, then, according to the radical constructivist view, we must never
say that our knowledge is “true” in the sense that it reflects an ontologically real world.
Knowledge neither should nor could have such a function. The fact that some
construct has for some time survived experience – or experiments, for that matter –
means that up to that point it was viable in that it bypassed constraints that were
inherent in the range of experience within which we were operating. But viability does

Ernst von Glasersfeld (1981) The Concepts of Adaptation and Viability…

6

not imply uniqueness, because there may be innumerable other constructs that would
have been as viable as the one we created.
This principle applies as much to the epistemological model suggested here as to
any other model constructed. Thus, it should be emphasized that I am not claiming
ontological status for the proposed model. The model being developed here is one that
might allow us to think of knowledge and the activity of knowing without the basic
contradiction that is inherent in traditional epistemology.
As a parting comment, let me borrow yet another idea from Piaget: the concept
of decentration. Piaget has observed that not only the child in his or her ontogenetic
development moves from egocentricity to states of increasing decentration, but so
does our species. Looking at our intellectual history and the progression of cognitive
constructs and explanatory models, Piaget singled out Copernicus who successfully
abolished the egocentric notion that the little planet on which we live must be the
center of the universe. We know that it was a difficult step to take and that resistance
against it lasted longer than a century. It seems that now we shall have to make yet
another, even more difficult step in that direction, namely, to give up the notion that
the representations we construct from our experience should in any sense reflect a
world as it might be without us.

References
Bateson, G. Cybernetic explanation. American Behavioral Scientist, 1967, 10(8),
29-32.
Ceccato, S. Il Toceono. Methodos. 1949, 1(1), 34-55.
Ceccato, S. Un tecnico fra i filosofi (Vol. I). Padua, Italy: Marsilio, 1964.
Ceccato, S. Un tecnico fra I filosofi (Vol. I I). Padua, Italy: Marsilio, 1966.
Hebb, D. O. Alice in Wonderland or psychology among the biological sciences. In H. F.
Harlow & C. N. Woolsey (Eds.), Biological and biochemical bases of behavior.
Madison, Wisc.: University of Wisconsin Press, 1958.
Maturana, H. Biology of cognition. BCL Report Nr. 9.0. Urbana, Ill.: University of
Illinois, 1970.
Michel, T. Piaget: Cognitive conflict and the motivation of thought. In T. Mischel
(Ed.), Cognitive development and epistemology. New York: Academic Press, 1971.
Piaget, J. La construction du réel chez l’enfant. Neuchâtel: Delachaux et Niestlé, 1937.
Piaget, J. L’equilibration des structures cognitives. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1975.
Popper, K. R. The logic of scientific discovery. New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1965.
(Originally published, 1934).
Popper, K. R. Conjectures and refutations. New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1968.
(Originally published, 1962).
Smock, C. D., & von Glasersfeld, E. (Eds.) Epistemology and education. MAP Report
Nr. 14. Athens, Georgia: Follow Through Publications, 1974.
von Foerster, H. Notes pour une épistémologie des objets vivants. In E. Morin & M.
Piattelli-Palmarini (Eds.), L’unité de l’homme. Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1972.
von Foerster, H. Objects: Tokens for (eigen)behaviors. Paper presented at the Meeting
for the Celebration of Jean Piaget’s 80th Birthday. Cybernetics Forum, 1976, 8,
91-96.
Ernst von Glasersfeld (1981) The Concepts of Adaptation and Viability…

7

von Glasersfeld, E. Piaget and the radical constructivist epistemology. In C. D. Smock
& E. von Glasersfeld (Eds.), Epistemology and Education, 1974.
von Glasersfeld, E. Radical constructivism and Piaget’s concept of knowledge. In F. B.
Murray (Ed.), Impact of Piagetian theory, Baltimore: University Park Press, 1978.
von Glasersfeld, E. Cybernetics and cognitive development. In P. B. Vrtunski (Chair)
Relevance and perspectives of cybernetics in psychology. Annual Meeting of the
American Psychological Association, 1976. Cybernetics Forum, 1976, 8, 115-120.
von Glasersfeld, E. Notes on the epistemological revolution. In von Foerster (Chair)
The general systems paradigm: Model for a changing science. SGSR/AAAS
Symposium, Denver, Colo.: 1977. (a)
von Glasersfeld, E. A radical constructivist view of knowledge. In B. A. Kaufman
(Chair) Implications of constructivism for human development. Paper presented at
Annual Meeting of AERA, New York, 1977. (b)
Wittgenstein, L. Tractatus logico-philosophicus. London: Kegan Paul, Trench,
Trubner, 1953. (Originally published, 1922).
This paper was downloaded from the Ernst von Glasersfeld Homepage, maintained by Alexander Riegler.
It is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License.
To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/ or
send a letter to Creative Commons, 559 Nathan Abbott Way, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
Preprint version of 25 Feb 2006

Ernst von Glasersfeld (1981) The Concepts of Adaptation and Viability…

8

