The Construction of Knowledge

When I am asked to talk about Constructivism, I usually start by explaining the four sources from which I proceeded to develop this way of thinking, They are both historical and biographical sources and can be summarily described by the headings: (1) Language, (2) the work of the skeptics from the beginnings of Western History, (3) a key concept of Darwins theory of evolution and, (4) Cybernetics. About thirty years ago, Heinz von Foerster noticed an inherent quality of the nervous system (and almost everybody believes that human beings must be viewed as nervous systems when one focuses on cognition): The signals that are sent from sensory elements to the cortex are all the same. This had been discovered by Johannes Müller around the middle of the last century, but von Foerster was, as far as I know, the first to emphasize its epistemological implications. He called this “undifferentiated coding”. What this means is that if a neuron in the retina sends a “visual” signal to the cortex, this signal has exactly the same form as the signals that come from the ears, from the nose, from fingers or toes, or any other signal-generating part of the organism. There is no qualitative distinction between any of these signals. They all vary in frequency and amplitude, but there is no qualitative indication of what they are supposed to mean. It was a very baffling observation. It has since been confirmed by Humberto Maturana in the field of color vision, where he has shown that the receptors which are supposed to sense red – or what physicists think of as the kind of light waves we call red – send signals that are in no way different from the ones that sense green. If we are able to distinguish them, the distinctions must be made in the cortex. Yet, they cannot be made on the basis of simple qualitative differences, because there are no such differences. It is therefore unwarranted to maintain that we distinguish things because we receive “information” from what we usually call the outside world. From the epistemological point of view, this is earth-shaking. Yet if you look through the contemporary literature of psychology and especially the 	psychology of perception, one finds practically no reference to it.

Language
When I explain that, for me, language was a source of constructivism, I cannot help  but speak in a biographical vein. I was in what I consider the fortunate position of  growing up without a particular native language. I grew up with two, and very soon it  was three. So I grew up between languages.  For a child, learning two or three languages is no problem whatsoever if the  languages are spoken in the everyday environment. Indeed, the child for the most part  is unaware of speaking different languages to different people. But then, in the course  of growing up, the child reaches the stage when the first philosophical questions begin  to bubble up. It happens around the time of puberty. You stand in front of a mirror  and for the first time ask yourself: Who am I? Why am I here? What is all this about?  – And philosophy begins.  Having grown up the way I did, you sooner or later also come to ask another  question. You realize that the differences between the languages are not merely a  matter of vocabulary or grammar, but a matter of looking at the world. This inevitably  raises the question, which of these ways of looking might be the right one. But then,  because you have been living quite happily among people who look at the world  differently, you realize that this is a silly question, because all the speakers of one  language obviously think that theirs is the “right” way of looking at the world. After a  while you conclude that each group may be right for itself and that there is no  rightness outside the groups.  In retrospect, I believe it was this circumstance that drove me into philosophy  and was the primary source of my interest in theories of knowledge. I read philosophy  eclectically and without supervision. This has a disadvantage. Having no professional  guidance, it may take you many years to solve a problem, and then you discover that  you could have found the solution in a book, if only someone had told you where to  look. On the other hand, eclectic reading has the advantage that you read some  authors that are never mentioned in standard philosophy courses. And in my case  some of these authors happened to be particularly important for constructing a  constructivist theory of knowing.

The Skeptics
My thinking took a serious turn when I happened upon the skeptics. What they have been saying has remained essentially the same for two thousand five hundred years. It did not change, because the argument that was well formulated already by the PreSocratics in the 6th century B.C. is a logically incontrovertible argument. The way I see it is very simple. The skeptics argue that what we come to know has gone through our sensory system and through our conceptual system and it gives us a picture. But when we would like to know whether this is a correct picture, a true picture of an outside world, we are completely stuck, because every time we look at the outside world, what we see is again seen through our sensory system and through our conceptual system. So we are trapped in a paradox. We want to believe that we can know something of the outside world, but we can never tell whether this knowledge is true. Because to establish such truth would require a comparison which we simply cannot make. We have no way of getting at the outside world, except by experiencing it. And in experiencing it, we may be making the same mistakes; even if we saw it all correctly, we would have no way of knowing that it is correct. This leaves epistemology in a rather dismal position. If you look at the Western History of Philosophy, you find some beautiful dreams, some beautiful stories about how it could be. But none of them is able to answer that primary problem of how our knowledge could be considered true, if by true we intend a true representation of an ontological world, a world before we have come to know it. If this is the situation, it seems to me one has to try to see whether there is another way. And that other way, I think, was first thought of in the Renaissance. It surfaced with the trial of Galileo. As you know, Galileo was accused of heresy by the Vatican because his model of the planetary system was not the same as the one the Vatican wanted to have true. At that time, Cardinal Bellarmino tried to warn Galileo. Bellarmino, who had been the prosecutor in the case against Giordano Bruno, was a civilized man and, although he was a believing Catholic, he felt it was a pity that some of the most intelligent men should have to be burned. He wrote a letter to a friend of Galileos saying that Galileo would be prudent if he always spoke in the hypothetical mode and presented his theories as theories for making calculations and predictions, but he must not present them as descriptions of Gods world. This was the beginning of a split between what I would call rational knowledge and mystical knowledge. The separation of these two kinds of knowledge can be found in much of the skeptical thinking of the 16th, 17th, and 18th Centuries. Among others there were thinkers like Gassendi and Mersenne in France, who argued that it was perfectly all right for science to make rational models, but they were always models of our experiential world and not models of a real world. This separation of two kinds of knowledge – the rational and the non-rational – was a novel idea in skepticism. If I have called the second “mystical”, some people may think that I intend an evaluation, that I value the mystical less than the rational. This is not so. In that regard I follow the first real constructivist, the Italian philosopher Giambattista Vico, who contrasted the knowledge of reason and the knowledge of “poetic imagination” but did not question the value of both. He wrote a Latin thesis at the very beginning of the 18th century and called it “De Antiquissima Italorum Sapientia”. It is the first constructivist manifesto. Speaking about the real world, Vico said very clearly that humans can only know what humans themselves have made. He crystallized this in the rather beautiful statement that God is the artificer of the world, man the god of artifacts. (When Vico said “man”, he included women, which at that time was always taken for granted.)

An Evolutionary Concept
So much for the history of philosophy. Epistemology was left in a precarious situation. There were two kinds of knowledge in need of justification. The mystical could be justified only by the dogma of sacred books or a metaphysical myth. The rational seemed to have lost its justification if one could no longer say that scientific knowledge was true in the sense that it provided a true representation of an outside world. This made rational knowledge seem rather weak in the eyes of most philosophers. What was needed was a justification that did not involve representation. A way to build such a justification was first supplied by a concept that is inherent in Darwins Theory of Evolution. The moment I say this, I realize that it will be misinterpreted. I do not mean that scientific knowledge could evolve in the same manner that species evolve in an environment. It is important to make this clear because there is much talk today about “evolutionary epistemology” and I consider this misleading. For me, as for a number of thinkers at the turn of the century, the important idea was the notion of “fit” rather than “match”. In Darwins Theory an organisms physical form and its way of behaving must fit into the environment in which it has to live. You all know that adaptation in this Darwinian sense is not something that the organism itself can do. It is something accidental. Biological adaptation is not an activity of either organisms or species but a state of affairs. Anything that has the possibility to survive in the given environment is “fit”. As the biologist Colin Pittendrigh said, it is a pity that Darwin himself occasionally slipped and talked of “the survival of the fittest”, which is misleading. In principle, to be “fit” means to be able to survive. For the organism it is an either/or matter, not a matter of degree. That relationship of fitting into a set of constraints is what we call the relationship of “viability”. Organisms are viable if they manage to survive in spite of the constraints their environment places on their living and reproducing. This relationship, therefore, is not one of representation but one of fitting into given circumstances. Where knowledge is concerned, the circumstances are often purely logical ones. They do not constitute a physical environment but a conceptual one. To be viable, a new thought should fit into the existing scheme of conceptual structures in a way that does not cause contradictions. If there are contradictions, either the new thought or the old structures are deemed to require changing. The first person to take this idea and bring it into cognition was Mark Baldwin, who was one of Jean Piagets teachers in Paris. Piaget then developed it into a fullfledged theory of cognition and cognitive development. Throughout his works he repeated that cognition was an adaptive activity. In my opinion, however, a great many readers of Piaget never took this seriously. And still today, most read Piaget as though he talked about knowledge of the old kind, knowledge that is representational. If one tries to make a coherent interpretation of Piaget, one comes to the conclusion that this can be done only through a change of the concept of knowing and the concept of knowledge, a change from the representational to the adaptive. In this changed perspective, then, knowledge does not provide a representation of an independent world but rather a map of what can be done in the experienced environment.

Cybernetics
The last root of Constructivism is Cybernetics. This relatively new branch of studies focused much interest on self-regulation and self-organizing organisms. It seems to me that a serious study of Self-Regulation must come to the point where it asks also about the activity of knowing, and whether knowing is not also a result of self-regulation. Once again, a very simple statement. It means that whatever you call knowledge must be made-up or constructed out of material that is accessible to the knower. In fact, it is the cyberneticians way of formulating what Vico said; namely, that you can only know what you yourself have made. And to make it yourself, you must have access to the building blocks, to the raw material. Cybernetics then helps to unravel the question of what is accessible and what not. From the Cybernetic point of view, self-regulating systems are informationally closed. To explain this, we must remember what Claude Shannon, in his famous paper on the Theory of Communication, showed about signals and their meaning. Two of his points are sufficient to clear up the wide-spread misconception of the term “information”: (1) meaning does not travel from the sender to the receiver – the only thing that travels are signals; (2) signals are signals only insofar as someone can decode them, and in order to decode them you have to know their meaning. Communication, therefore, works when two people send each other a telegram and they have previously established a code outside that communication system. They can decode the message because they already know the code. But how should we decode the signals that we get from our sensors, the signals that, according to the traditional view, are coming from the outside world? We do not know who or what encoded them in that hypothetical outside world, nor do we know the code. We can only look at the signals from the inside, namely from the receivers side. Hence the use of the term information makes no sense in this context. We can speak of “information” relative to our own experiences, but never with regard to anything that is supposed to lie beyond our experiential interface. Professor Prigogine said, if I understood him rightly, “Knowledge is participation”. As you can tell from what I have said, I go further and say: “Knowledge is construction.”

Differences and Samenesses
In order to show you how Constructivism imagines this construction, I would like to describe one example. It is a construction which, I believe, most of us have accomplished within the first two years of our lives. What I am going to say is to a large extent based on Piagets La construction du réel chez lenfant”. There is no constructing unless you have some form of reflection. What I mean by reflection is much the same that Piaget and, long before him, the British empiricist Philosopher John Locke meant. Locke said early on in his treatise that there are two sources of knowledge. One is the senses, and the other is the minds reflection upon its own operations.  The childs reflection upon its own mental operations is for Piaget the basis of “reflective abstraction” which yields all the important concepts that cannot be derived directly from sensory or motor experience. These abstract or “operative” concepts form a level above the “figurative” ones that can be abstracted from sensory material. But, how would reflection start to build up anything? I would suggest (as did William James a long time ago) that the notions of differences and sameness are among the first indispensable tools. George Spencer Brown, in his treatise “Laws of Form”, begins with an injunction that says simply: “Make a distinction.” I think this is a good beginning for any mental activity. The distinction inevitably comes out of a comparison, and the comparison could just as well end in sameness. I want to talk about the kind of comparison that does not show a difference and you conclude that two things are the same. In some languages you have two words for this sameness. I do not know about Spanish, but in Italian you have “lo stesso” and “il medessimo.” Unfortunately they are both interchanged in common Italian today, but originally they probably had two different meanings. One for things considered the same with respect to all the characteristics that are examined, in the sense that members of a class are all the same. I call this kind of sameness “equivalence”. It is a very important conceptual building block, because without it one could never classify, and classification is responsible for a large part of our intellectual picture of the world. The other meaning of sameness is different. You use it when you intend that a given thing being considered now is not only like a thing seen yesterday, but is the same individual. I will call this sameness “individual identity.” It is clear that this too is very important in the construction of our conceptual world because it generates permanence. However, the attribution of individual identity is not free of problems. Let us assume that I was here yesterday and, just as now, had a glass of water in front of me. I come in today and say: “Oh, this is the same glass, the identical glass that stood here yesterday.” If someone asked me, how I can tell that it is the identical glass, I should have to look for a particular that distinguishes this glass from all others. This may turn out to be impossible. But this is not the problem I want to focus on.

Time and Space
There is another conceptual problem that is difficult for adults to see, because it was solved in an ingenious way at a very early age. I am claiming that the glass I see now is the self-same individual that I saw yesterday, but I did not see it during the entire interval of 24 hours. During that interval this glass was not part of my experiential world and my attention was on other things, and for a third of the interval I was asleep. Yet, I want to say this is the self-same, identical glass. This would require that the glass had some form of continuity outside my experiential world. Therefore there must be some place beyond my field of experience where the glass could be while I was busy experiencing other things or asleep. Piaget has called this “externalisation”, and according to him, children form this conception at an age between 18 months and 2 years. I have called it the construction of Proto-Space. It is not yet a metric space, and does not yet comprise any spatial relations. It is merely a kind of repository where things can be put to keep their individual identity while they are not being experienced. Their relations to one another can of course be added later as they are needed. This construction of proto-space immediately raises a second question: What are the items in it doing while one is experiencing other things? After all, a lot was going on in ones experiential world during the interval the abandoned items spent in their repository. The language in which I am describing this, the words “while” and “during”, already give away the trick. The “being” of the things in the repository gets extended so that they can keep up with the flow of my experience and be available when my attention turns to them again. This parallelism of two extensions – the flow of a subjects experience and the individual identities stretched over intervals in their repository is what I call “proto-time”. It is the beginning of the concept of time. It is different from the notion of proto-space because in it there are already the notions of “before” and “after”. But this “before” and “after” is constructed by the projection of the subjects experiences on things in the repository that are not in the field of experience. It is, indeed, this parallelism that makes it possible to choose a standard experience, for instance the movement of a clocks hand, and to project it on some other experiential sequence as a measure of time. To me, therefore, time is not, as Prigogine said, an illusion. If I called the construct of time an illusion, the entire world that I know, the world that I live in, would also have to be called an illusion. And that is not the way I would characterize it. Although my entire world is a construction, I can still make a useful distinction in it between illusion and reality. But remember that for me “reality” always refers to experiential reality, not to the ontological reality of traditional philosophy. If we want to construct a rational reality for ourselves, time and space are indispensable building blocks, and I would rather call “illusion” any claim to knowledge beyond the field of our experience.

Conclusion
Let me summarize some salient aspects of the constructivist way of thinking. First of all, it is a way of thinking and it is not a description of any world. It is a model, a hypothetical model. It makes no ontological claims. It does not purport to describe any absolute reality, but only phenomena of our own experience. If constructivists could have their way, they would never use the word “to be” in any form. Unfortunately our languages are made in such a way that we cannot do without that verb. The ambiguity of “to be” inevitably generates misconceptions. On the one hand it designates merely a copula that connects words, but on the other, since the beginning of our time, it has been tied to ontological existence. If I say “this glass is small”, it is relatively easy to understand that I am speaking from my point of view, given my experience. But if I say “this glass is”, I seem to be claiming that the glass “exists” as an entity independently of anyones experience. In this case, it is far more difficult to understand that I am speaking from my point of view, and that I consider it convenient to attribute a lasting individual identity to the glass I am perceiving. Like the philosopher George Berkeley, I do not know what “to exist” could mean, unless it simply refers to the things one perceives. This is important to remember when critics say that constructivism denies reality. It does not – it merely says that one cannot know an independent reality. Constructivism does not make ontological statements. It does not tell you how the world is. It merely suggest a way of thinking about it, and provides an analysis of the operations that generate a reality from experience. Constructivism is probably best characterized by saying that it is the first serious attempt to separate epistemology from ontology. In our history of ideas, epistemology – the study of what we know and how we come to know it – has always been tied to the notion that knowledge has to be a representation of an ontological world outside. Constructivism tries to do without that. It tries to do away with that condition and says, instead, that knowledge only has to be viable, to suit our purposes. It has to function, i.e., it has to fit into the world as we see it, not into the world as it might be. Because I was talking of time, let me end with a quotation from Shakespeare, who seems to have known all this perfectly well. Using the word “thought” instead of “knowledge”, he said: “But thoughts the slave of life, and life times fool; and time, that takes survey of all the world, must have a stop.”
