Any serious attempt to come to terms with Piaget's epistemological beliefs runs into three
formidable obstacles. First, the simple fact that during his productive lifetime -- well over
60 years -- he wrote more than any one person could keep up with; and his ideas, of course,
developed, interacted, and changed in more and less subtle ways. Second, as Piaget himself
is reputed to have said, he spoke one language to biologists, another to psychologists, and
yet another to philosophers; and one could add that, apart from these, he invented a private
one to speak about mathematics. Third, although he never ceased to praise the virtue of
"decentration" -- the ability to shift perspective -- as a writer, it seems, he did not often try
to put himself into his readers' shoes. His passionate effort to express his thoughts in the
greatest possible detail impedes understanding as often as it helps it. Even the best
intentioned reader is sometimes reduced to a state of exhausted despondence. Yet, I have
not the slightest doubt that it is worth struggling to overcome these obstacles, because it can
lead to an interpretation that provides a view of human knowledge and the process of
knowing which, it seems to me, is more coherent and more plausible than any other. But it
is a struggle, an interminable selecting, reconsidering, and discarding. What comes out of
this struggle can, of course, not be more than one individual interpretation.
For a constructivist, that is how it has to be. From that perspective there is no way of
transferring knowledge -- every knower has to build it up for himself. The cognitive
organism is first and foremost an organizer who interprets experience and, by interpretation,
shapes it into a structured world. That goes for experiencing what we call sensory objects
and events, experiencing language and others; and it goes no less for experiencing oneself.
L'intelligence . . . organise le monde en s'organisant elle-meme (CRE:311) 2.
This approach radically departs from the traditional conception of knowledge and reality.
Piaget uses these words and only rarely warns the reader that their meaning has been
changed. Every so often this creates the impression that he contradicts himself. Therein, I
believe, lies Piaget's weakness and the root of the innumerable misunderstandings of which
his work has been the victim. Sometimes one cannot help asking oneself whether this
opaqueness of expression in so powerful a thinker was an affliction or, rather, a deliberate
policy to shield the disciples from too revolutionary an insight. Be that as it may, Piaget
avoids explicit definitions of those basic terms. Instead, he suggests and implies the
meaning he would give them in a variety of contexts, and these meanings often seem
incompatible. It is as though he expected the reader to keep a cumulative record of all the
suggestions and implications, to combine and to discard, and eventually to find, without
being told, the key that unlocks the apparent puzzles. Inevitably, this makes for uncertainty,
and I therefore emphasize that the radical constructivist epistemology derived from my
analysis of Piaget's use of the terms "knowledge" and "reality", and the concomitant
concepts of truth and objectivity, is intended to be no more than one personal interpretation.